NARRATOR:
In the criminal justice system,
sexually based offenses are
considered especially heinous.
In New York City,
the dedicated detectives
who investigate
these vicious felonies
are members of an elite squad
known as
the Special Victims Unit.
These are their stories.
You understand,
there's no wiggle
room on the price.
Well, I'd like to see it
before we talk numbers.
A brownstone like this
won't stay on
the market for long.
What happened here?
Oh, God.
Donna! Call
for help.
I-I need the police.
Two people are dead.
( gasps )
H-Help me.
O'HALLORAN:
Dead lady's
Donna Brooks, 70.
No sign of forced entry,
no security cameras.
Raped and strangled.
Lumalite showed traces of semen.
Okay. Dispatch said
that you had a live one.
Old guy's Richard Sutton.
EMS is treating him out there.
Don't know why
he was here.
What happened to him?
Possible heart attack.
Marks, bruises?
Not that we
could see.
Is he stable enough to talk?
Yeah, but we
got to get him
to Saint Vincent's.
You can ride along.
I'm Detective Stabler.
Can you tell me
what happened?
Donna... Donna...
Now Mr. Sutton, tell
me what happened.
Oh, God.
I'm sorry.
For what?
( steady beep )
Mr. Sutton?
We lost his pulse.
What we got, another
heart attack?
He's in V-fib.
You know CPR?
Yeah.
Start chest compressions.
Grab the paddles.
Did he say anything else
to you two inside?
Just that his chest
was killing him. Back away.
Clear.
Still in V-fib.
I'll shock him again.
( siren blaring )
Clear.
( beeping )
I got a rhythm
and a pulse.
Let's move.
What the hell happened?
Okay, let's
get him in.
Heart attack.
Is that the victim?
No. More like the perp.
Captioning sponsored by
UNIVERSAL NETWORK TELEVISION
and NBC
Richard Sutton
is still unconscious.
He's in cardiac
intensive care.
Lives alone
on the Upper East Side.
Neighbors say
he keeps to himself.
What's he doing
hanging around
with the Queen
of the charity balls?
Well, he's a good-looking guy.
Donna Brooks is a wealthy widow.
Maybe he's her boyfriend.
So this could be
a domestic dispute?
Well, makes sense.
There's no obvious signs
of robbery or forced entry.
Donna and Richard
have sex, they argue,
it gets violent,
he murders her,
and then has
a heart attack
from all the
excitement?
Or he finds her dead body,
then has a heart attack.
The victim's family should know
if she and Sutton were involved.
BENSON:
Her daughter Joset
is on her way in
right now from Jersey.
The marks
on her neck are distinctive.
Did you find the ligature?
No. CSU's checking
for all possibles
in the victim's house--
lamp cords,
belts, drapery pulls.
Warner give us
a time of death?
Based on rigor
and body temp,
she puts it at 10:00 last night.
Okay. Keep on CSU
for the ligature report.
Captain...
MAN:
Right this way.
Excuse me.
I'm, uh, here about my mother,
Donna Brooks.
STABLER:
Why was your mother
selling her brownstone?
Because I forced her to.
She liked her independence,
but I wanted her
to spend the time she had left
with me and her grandkids.
She was sick.
Lymphoma.
She had less
than a year.
When was the last time
you spoke with her?
( sobbing ):
I called her this morning.
But I got the machine.
I just figured
she was exercising.
She was that strong?
She worked out
every morning at 5:00.
She said she...
she wanted to stay fit,
because there was a lot
of competition for a good man.
Your mom dated a lot?
This is just so embarrassing.
So, your mother was
sexually active?
With all sorts of men.
She ever mention the name
Richard Sutton?
No,
I've never heard of him,
but that doesn't mean anything.
I told her to be more careful.
BENSON:
Was there anyone special?
Harvey Cohen.
He was an instructor
at Hot to Trot.
He taught her how to tango.
BENSON:
Excuse me, can you tell me
which one Harvey Cohen is?
He's right there.
Right there. Thank you.
Harvey Cohen?
Yes.
Mind if
I cut in?
Phil, take over,
will you?
I could never refuse
a beautiful lady.
Good. Then you won't
mind telling me
if Donna Brooks was
here last night.
Why don't we
step over here?
She's here every Monday.
You tell me
what this is about.
Just have a couple
of questions.
How well did
you know Donna?
We're partners.
We have a standing date
after class.
Oh. So you were
having an affair?
Oh, shame on you, Detective.
A gentleman doesn't kiss
and tell.
A gentleman doesn't rape
and murder his girlfriend.
What the hell
are you talking about?
Donna Brooks--
she was murdered last night.
Oh, my God.
What, you don't think
I killed her.
You just admitted to
having a date with her.
Well, I canceled.
Why?
Well, she was flirting
with another man
during class, in
front of everyone.
What did you do about that?
I told her to take
her boy toy and get out.
This boy toy have a name?
Ben Pawler.
Young enough to be her son.
MAN:
Donna and I left class
together.
Went back to her place.
What's the big deal?
I'd say about
a 40-year age
difference.
You should try it.
Older women--
they have more experience.
They're less inhibited.
And you don't have to worry
about getting them knocked up.
BENSON:
You forgot to mention
financially
independent.
Donna has a
lot of dough.
Definitely sweetens the pot.
STABLER:
Had a lot of dough,
ass-wipe.
Donna was murdered last night.
She was fine
when I left her.
No, I take that back.
She was satisfied.
Yeah? What time was that, Romeo?
9:15.
Can anyone back up that story?
Marion?
( door opening )
I picked Ben up from Donna's
at 9:15, Detectives.
BENSON:
Benny, Harvey, Sutton.
Donna got around.
Guess she was trying
to pack a lot of living
into the days she had left.
Well, she should've
had better taste in men.
I got an update
on Richard Sutton.
Doc says he's still intubated,
nobody can see him.
But I did some digging.
Turns out
Mr. Sutton had four wives.
All four
still alive?
First three died
of natural causes.
Last Mrs. Sutton is still
with us.
She's so sweet.
And loaded.
He knows how to pick 'em--
old and rich.
Yeah, but he doesn't know
how to treat them.
The most recent Mrs. Sutton
filed a 61
for domestic violence last year.
BENSON:
And they didn't
lock him up?
She conveniently
dropped the complaint.
Where is she now?
Social Security checks go
to an address in Queens.
BENSON:
Alexis, I wanted to ask you
about Richard.
Who?
Your husband?
Marty was
my husband.
My one true love.
He died in Korea.
I have his medals.
MAN:
Sorry, Detectives,
I got held up.
Your message said
you wanted to talk
about Richard Sutton.
Not Richard.
Marty. Marty.
President Truman sent me
a telegram.
Alzheimer's?
Progressing rapidly.
No offense, Mr. Ridley,
but we heard she had money.
What is she doing
in a place like this?
Oh, she did,
until that snake Sutton
got hold of it.
He married her,
and then he dumped
her in here,
so he could live like a king.
Now, does he ever come
and visit her?
Only when he needs
her signature.
She is obviously
in no...
I want that
cracker.
...condition to
sign anything.
I filed a complaint,
but nothing happened.
Husband has the right to do
what he wants with the money.
BENSON:
Including romancing
other women?
If you call
slapping around women romantic.
He hit her?
After Sutton's last visit,
I found her lying on the floor,
all bruised up.
BENSON:
Did you report it?
I didn't see him do it,
and Alexis said
she must've fallen out of bed.
This time
Sutton is going
to answer
my questions.
STABLER:
We found your
wife, Mr. Sutton,
the one you
stashed away
at that dump
in Queens.
You want to
talk about her?
I'm not surprised.
Why don't we talk
about Donna Brooks then?
BENSON:
Is she your next target,
Mr. Sutton?
What, did she reject you?
Is that why you raped
and killed her?
( groans )
How did you get into the house?
Write your answer down.
The house
was open?
What time were you there?
STABLER:
You were there
at 9:00 a.m. this morning?
Where were you
at 10:00 last night?
"Home...
alone."
So, you have no alibi
for when she was killed?
STABLER:
"Not killed last night."
How do you know that?
"Donna exercises
"a.m.
"Windows...
always... open."
Did you shut them?
"Freezing."
You turned up the heat?
( softly groans )
WARNER:
Postmortem
body temp decreases
roughly one degree per hour
at average room temperature.
What was Donna's body temp
when the real estate agent
found her?
About 86 degrees,
which is 12 degrees
below normal.
That puts time of
death at 10:00 p.m.,
12 hours earlier.
Problem is, I
didn't account
for the freezing
apartment,
or the fact she
was exercising.
So, how does that change
your calculation?
The exertion from working out
depleted her
adenosine triphosphate,
causing rigor
to occur faster.
So the exercise sped up
the rigor, and the cold caused
a rapid decline in
body temperature.
But what's that
add up to now?
I was wrong
about the time of death.
Donna was killed
early this morning.
I'd say around 6:00 a.m.
We have to
reinterview
all the men.
We didn't get alibis
for this morning.
I've got something
that might help.
I didn't find fibers in the skin
of your victim's neck,
but the ligature's impression
is unusual.
STABLER:
Does it match anything
at the crime scene?
No. The killer took
whatever he used with him.
You have any
idea what it was?
Sorry. But the FBI has
a database.
I forwarded the image
to their lab.
Well, Huang works
for the Bureau.
Maybe he can
expedite our search.
Thanks.
HUANG:
The murder weapon is a rope--
a static kernmantle.
It's used in rock climbing,
it's extremely strong,
and it doesn't fray.
Well, that's why
there were no fibers.
Does VICAP have any other cases
where this kind
of rope was used?
I already checked,
and there's 15 matches.
( beep )
STABLER:
Tell you what.
Let's narrow this down
by using our M.O., okay?
Okay. Give me
the search parameters.
BENSON:
Victim is female,
age 60 to 80,
strangulation
homicide.
STABLER:
In her own home.
BENSON:
Wow. Two
matches.
And the first one
is Susan Zelman,
age 65.
Killed two years ago
in Brooklyn.
Second one, Claudia Wooding,
70, murdered three
years ago in Piermont.
BENSON
Three females
over 60,
all from the
Metro area,
all strangled
with this static kernmantle.
We've got a serial killer
preying on the elderly.
CRAGEN:
Three rich elderly women
all strangled
with the same rope.
STABLER:
Perp's organized.
Doesn't leave a
murder weapon,
no prints, no sign
of forced entry.
CRAGEN:
The victims know him,
so they let him in.
Or he conned 'em.
Old people
make great targets.
They're lonely.
They're vulnerable.
Let's keep the
M.O. in-house.
Last thing we
need is a copycat.
What've you got?
The victims' nearest
and dearest.
FIN:
Claudia Wooding's
son, Eddie Wooding.
Detective on the case says
Eddie's a real schmuck.
Mother disinherited
him after he lost
a bundle of her
money in the market.
Where's Eddie now?
He owns a fancy
car dealership.
What about Susan Zelman?
No suspects
in her murder.
She's survived by
her husband Marvin.
CRAGEN:
They look at him?
He's got rheumatoid arthritis,
confined to a wheelchair.
Doubt he had the strength
to strangle her.
Munch, Fin, go
talk to Eddie.
You two, pay a
visit to Mr. Zelman.
There's got to
be a link between
these three women.
Apart from being dead?
MARVIN:
I'll never forgive myself
for her death.
Why is that,
Mr. Zelman?
Because I was out
playing bridge.
She didn't want to go.
If I'd stayed home,
this wouldn't have happened.
Mr. Zelman.
Did your wife know
a Donna Brooks?
No, no, and I know
all of Susan's friends.
How 'bout
Claudia Wooding?
Yeah, Claudia was my mother.
Why you asking?
Did she know Donna Brooks
or Susan Zelman?
How the hell
do I know?
If you're
sniffing around,
trying to reopen
my mother's murder,
save your energy.
I didn't kill her.
Any idea who did?
I just can't imagine
anyone hurting my Susan.
Now, the police said
it was probably a drug addict
looking for money.
Was anything taken?
Not a thing.
She only had $20 in her purse,
even though she had
plenty of money.
Who inherited the
money after she died?
EDDIE:
Not me.
Bitch didn't leave me
a dime.
Sounds like a fine motive
for murder.
Oh, why bother?
She was about to kick
the bucket anyway.
Lung cancer.
STABLER:
Your wife was sick?
She had breast cancer...
and on the very day
she was killed,
the oncologist told her
she was in remission.
Who was the
oncologist?
STABLER:
Dr. Brelsford,
we need your help.
It's about two
of your patients:
Susan Zelman and
Claudia Wooding.
Unfortunately, they both died
several years ago.
Of cancer?
I believe they were
both murdered.
That's quite a coincidence.
Isn't it.
What's this about?
Donna Brooks.
Was she a patient of yours?
No, but she was treated
at this hospital.
Why are you asking
about her?
She was murdered also.
I assure you, if I wanted
to kill somebody,
you'd never know it was murder.
Yeah? How's that?
Because I'd know how...
To cover it up?
Is that what
you were going to say?
No.
You make some
lethal house calls
to rich old ladies?
My patients are very grateful
for the quality
of care I give them.
I have no reason
to kill anybody.
I'm very busy. Is that all?
No. Where were you yesterday
at 6 a.m.?
At home.
With who?
I live by myself.
STABLER:
Doctor, we have two,
possibly three dead women,
all of 'em connected to you.
You're going to have to do
a little better than that.
Look... lots of people
are involved
in the care of cancer patients.
Like who?
In the hospital,
there's a team
of doctors,
nurses, social workers.
After discharge, they often use
in-home care.
STABLER:
Who provides that?
I use RDH,
run by Dr. Matt Spevak.
My patients wouldn't settle
for less.
Dr. Spevak is in a meeting,
but I'm Emma Spevak,
the Nurse Manager.
Are you his wife?
Sister. What can I do for you?
We need to confirm
that Claudia Wooding
and Susan Zelman
were clients.
I'll check.
Yes, they were.
How 'bout Donna Brooks?
Yes, she was as well.
What's this about?
They were
all murdered.
Oh, my God.
Well, please tell me what you
need, and I'll help you.
Did they have a
caretaker in common?
Nurse DeVaal was the primary
for all three.
What's going on, Emma?
This is Dr. Spevak.
Doctor, I'm Detective Stabler.
This is my partner,
Detective Benson.
Hey.
Oh, you must be here
about Donna Brooks.
I saw it on the news.
BENSON:
Two other patients of yours
were also killed.
Your sister says
that a Nurse DeVaal
treated all of 'em.
Where can
we find her?
Him.
Gary hasn't been with us
for a few weeks now.
Why?
A patient accused
him of stealing.
I fired him.
BENSON
Which patient?
Donna Brooks.
Where is Gary
working now?
Meals on Wheels.
( knocking )
Gary DeVaal?
Yeah?
We'd like to
talk to you about
Donna Brooks.
What about her?
Why don't we take
a ride?
Oh, Gary.
You brought friends.
We're the police, ma'am.
The police?
Yeah.
Wha-What happened?
Can't stay today,
Mrs. Rabinowitz.
Here's your dinner.
Don't go.
No one else visits me.
I'll come back
tomorrow-- I promise.
Shouldn't make promises
you can't keep.
STABLER:
Why'd you steal
from Donna Brooks?
I didn't.
The bitch is lying.
The bitch is
dead, Gary.
I hated her,
but I didn't kill her.
Why didn't you like her?
Everyone else did.
Everyone else
didn't work for her.
Getting fired
was the best thing
that could've
happened to me.
So why'd you keep
her house keys?
Plan to pay
her a visit?
I never got a chance
to return them.
"To my dear
husband, Larry,
with love,
from Donna."
I guess you didn't
have a chance to return
her dead husband's
watch, either, huh?
She docked me 20 bucks
for being ten minutes late.
You took a $10,000 Rolex!
Fair trade?
That old bat
gave half a mil
to feed the pigeons.
She didn't need the lousy watch!
You steal from
them as well?
No. I'd never
rip off Susan.
She was a sweetheart.
Well, how 'bout Claudia Wooding?
Is she a sweetheart, too?
I've never seen her
before in my life.
RDH says you
were her nurse.
RDH is lying!
Someone's setting me up!
Check the files!
That enough to subpoena
RDH's records?
Yeah, I'll get started
on the paperwork,
but since DeVaal is
shouting frame job,
I want the files
authenticated.
Take 'em to the forensic
document examiner.
We'll catch this low-life
in another lie.
Keep DeVaal on ice--
I'll go check it out.
I reviewed
Claudia Wooding's file.
DeVaal's signature is definitely
on the nursing logs.
So DeVaal is lying.
Not necessarily.
What do you mean?
RNs have to sign off
at the end of each shift.
Now, these are
Claudia Wooding's
case logs with, uh...
from two different dates
with Gary DeVaal's
signature on each.
Now watch this.
Bam.
They're identical.
Yeah, but nobody signs
their name
exactly the same way
every time.
We call it
a transposition forgery.
So someone Xeroxed
DeVaal's signature
and then cut and
pasted onto the files.
Which was then copied, making
the paste job undetectable.
So DeVaal was right;
he is being set up.
It's got to be someone at RDH.
They're the only ones with
access to the victims' files.
DeVaal is a sleazeball
who got fired for theft.
He's a good fall-guy.
But why kill these women?
Well, they're all rich.
They're known for
their generosity.
Maybe someone made a
profit off their deaths.
You're right.
Someone made a mint.
I pulled copies
of the victims' wills.
Who's the lucky beneficiary?
The Golden Memories Foundation.
Who gets the gold?
Dr. Matt Spevak,
CEO of RDH and chairman
of Golden Memories.
Well... looks
like the good doctor's
been killing old ladies
for their money.
I didn't kill anyone.
This is outrageous.
My client is a well-known,
respected physician.
Well, tell me,
there, Doc,
did these women die
of natural causes?
Of course not...
but why would I murder them?
Oh, I can think of about a
million bucks worth of reasons.
Each victim left you
quite a bit of cash.
By killing them, you got
your hands on it quicker.
I don't inherit
their money.
The bequests go to charity
for poverty-stricken seniors.
Right, Golden Memories
Foundation.
SPEVAK:
Golden Memories
is a legitimate
nonprofit organization.
Whose mission is to fleece
rich old ladies.
My company's doing well.
I don't need their money.
I started the foundation to give
something back.
You gave three women
back to God.
Does that count?
Excuse me, aren't we missing
something here,
like direct evidence?
Your client had access
to the victims' homes
and profited substantially
from their deaths.
That's not probable cause
for arrest.
Call us if you ever get any.
Matt, let's go.
Spevak's laughing at us.
I'm not going to
let that bastard
get away with this.
I'm not so sure
Spevak's guilty.
Well, gee, Doc, do
you know something
that we don't,
or are you just
extending Spevak
a little professional
courtesy?
I'm giving you
my professional opinion.
A doctor would've covered
his tracks better.
Well, what do you
call forging a
nurse's signature?
What's his motive?
Money.
Best motive in the world.
These murders were
way too personal
to have been
committed for profit.
Choking the life out
of three elderly women
is a sign of rage.
Or a sign that he couldn't get
his hands on their money
fast enough.
Okay, hold it--
we don't know if Spevak
got any of their money.
Where are we on
his financials?
Novak says we don't have enough
to subpoena his bank records.
Golden Memories
is a nonprofit.
That means that his books
are public record.
Have a forensic
accountant see
if Spevak's cooking 'em.
Last year, Golden Memories
took in 675 grand.
How much did they spend
in grants?
All of it...
most which went for the care
of two indigent patients:
Maria Franco and
Andrea Robbins.
That's a lot of
charity for two people.
Yeah, especially
two dead ones.
I checked
with Social Security.
Maria Franco and Andrea Robbins
have been dead since '96.
Spevak's been keeping
phony records and
pocketing the money.
That's enough
for a search warrant.
FIN:
Look at this place.
Got to be at least
3000 square feet.
Beautiful view, fancy art,
expensive antiques...
MUNCH:
All of it
unpaid for.
His credit cards
are all maxed out.
On what?
Gambling.
Every casino from
Atlantic City to Foxwoods.
Answering
machine's blinking.
Probably a collection
agency.
( beeping )
MAN:
Hey, Spevak,
you're late again.
You better pay up, Doc,
or we're coming over.
Doesn't sound
like Master Card.
Explains why he
killed the old ladies.
He needs money,
fast.
Look at here.
When Spevak's
not killing old folks,
he's climbing rocks.
I'll say.
( metal clinking )
Webbing, harness...
belay devices.
And our
murder weapon.
EMMA:
Can this wait?
My brother's
in a meeting
with a new client.
Your brother is a suspect
in three homicides.
You're wrong.
Matt would
never hurt anyone.
Well, we have
strong proof that he did.
It's a mistake.
There's got
to be an explanation.
I'd love to hear it.
( knocks )
As you can see,
we offer only
the highest
standards of care.
You'll be
looked after
in the comfort of
your own home.
Emma, you'll have
to wait.
I'm in the middle
of something.
I know, I'm sorry, but it's...
Damn it, Emma.
I told you
no interruptions.
Detectives.
Excuse me,
I'll be right back.
No, you won't.
Matt Spevak, you're
under arrest for Murder
in the First
Degree.
This is insane--
what the hell
did you tell them,
Emma?!
Nothing, I swear, Matt.
MAN:
How does the defendant plead?
Not guilty, Your Honor.
I'll hear
the People on bail.
Remand.
Dr. Spevak manipulated
three elderly women
out of their money
and then killed them for it.
The funds have
not been recovered.
He's a flight risk.
My client is a respected member
of the community.
Save it,
Ms. Staines.
Unfortunately
for the defendant,
I have an 80-year-old mother.
SPEVAK:
I didn't
kill anyone.
Bail is set
at $500,000.
Come on, doc.
Let's go.
He'll plead out
on the fraud, Casey.
Not enough.
He pleads to three
counts of Murder Two,
I'll take the death
penalty off the table.
EMMA:
The death penalty?
My brother is innocent.
Don't worry, Emma.
Ms. Novak
is bluffing.
She has no case.
Let's post bail and
get Matt out of here.
NOVAK:
Spevak's attorney
is no fool.
The fraud case is solid,
but the evidence
on the murders is weak.
STABLER:
The Crime Lab says
the rope found
in Spevak's apartment
matches the pattern
on the victims' necks.
Is it the actual
murder weapon?
Lab didn't find any blood
or skin cells on it.
Spevak wouldn't
need much rope
to strangle
someone.
Three feet
at most.
He cuts off
a piece,
he uses it,
he throws it away.
But I still can't connect
him to the murders.
Everything we have
is circumstantial.
Okay, what
about the sister?
She runs
Spevak's office,
she'd have to know
about the fraud.
Maybe she's the one
who forged
DeVaal's signature
on the nursing logs.
That would make her
a co-conspirator.
So let's bring her in
for a chat.
( siren wailing )
Special Victims.
What's going on?
Gal from the nursing agency
was attacked.
Looks like
she was nearly
choked to death.
She conscious?
Yeah. We called
for a bus,
but she says
she's all right.
The EMTs are
checking her out.
Ms. Spevak,
can you talk?
Yes.
Who did this to you?
I don't know.
I'm fine now really.
Look, you need to get
to a hospital
to make sure
that you're okay.
Well, I'm a nurse.
I can take care of this.
Emma? Emma,
listen to me.
This guy nearly
killed you.
I can't... I can't...
Was it your brother?
He's been under so much stress.
He said he needed some money.
When I told him
I wouldn't give him any more,
he freaked out.
He didn't mean it.
Please, don't hurt him.
Looks like the
doctor's gonna split.
Why don't you cut the bedrooms?
Bedroom's clear.
Clear.
Maybe he had a few errands
to run first,
like choking his sister.
Or getting cash.
He's tapped out
with the loan sharks.
Posting bail would have
cleaned him out.
But he knows plenty
of rich old ladies.
Let's see
if he called any of them.
Caller ID.
Someone called at 5:05 a.m.
Vivian Calas.
Police. Search warrant.
Spevak, Police.
Show yourself.
I'll get back.
Clear.
In the bedroom.
She's dead.
So is Matt Spevak.
STABLER:
Sorry, Doc,
but there is your serial killer.
He just picked the
wrong victim this time.
So, the old lady killed him?
Vivian Calas shot Spevak
in the heart.
Bled out in seconds.
Well, she must
have been pretty
good with a gun.
SIPER:
Not that good.
From the trajectory
of the bullet,
I'd say she's
on the bed,
pulls a gun out
of the night stand,
fires once and misses,
then takes
a lucky shot
and hits him.
Why lucky?
Detectives arrived
at 9:00 this morning.
Spevak's blood
had congealed.
That takes at
least three hours.
None of the
lights were on
when we got here.
She shot him
in the dark.
CSU found this jewelry
in Spevak's pockets.
Vivian called
Spevak.
He rushes on
over here.
He uses the opportunity
to rip her off
for some travel cash.
BENSON:
He takes the jewelry.
He's gonna
strangle her,
but she has a little
surprise for him--
nine-mill Lady
Smith and Wesson.
STABLER:
Registered in her name.
She shoots him,
dies of fright.
M.E. says that the
left hand side
of her body
was contracted.
Uh, cause of death
was a stroke.
HUANG:
I don't see any
medications here
for hypertension
or blood thinners.
She doesn't look like
she has any risk factors
for a stroke.
STABLER:
She's an 80-year-old
woman with a man
in her bedroom
trying to kill her.
He scared her to death.
Well, if she's so scared,
then how'd she get a shot off
in the dark
that hit him right in the heart?
Stroke doesn't make sense.
WARNER:
Vivian Calas did have a stroke,
but it wasn't caused by fear.
Puncture mark on her neck.
I missed it at first
because her skin is so wrinkled.
STABLER:
What was she
injected with?
The tox screen
came back negative,
so my guess is air.
How would air kill her?
An air embolus injected
into the carotid artery
would cause a stroke.
The embolus acts like a clot,
blocking the blood flow
to the brain.
BENSON:
No syringe
was found
at the crime scene.
Look, we know
Matt Spevak didn't die
of natural causes,
and now you're telling us
she didn't, either?
Had to have been a third person
in that room.
Only a health professional
would know about an air embolus
and be able to do it properly.
There's one other person
with access
to RDH files, keys and patients.
Spevak's sister, Emma.
Why Emma?
Maybe she and Matt were in
on the murders together.
She finds out
that Matt is going to run
and leave her
to face the music.
Emma kills
Vivian Calas,
then calls Matt
from her house
to come over.
Tells him that
Vivian is sick.
When Matt gets there,
Emma shoots him.
She puts the old lady's
fingerprints on the gun,
on the phone,
and then makes it look
like Matt tried to rob her.
CRAGEN:
Except Emma said
Matt was the one
who strangled her.
But that doesn't play,
because Matt was dead
two hours
before Emma called 911.
So then, who tried
to strangle Emma?
Emma strangled Emma.
She's smart enough
to kill someone with air.
It's easy to choke herself.
It's gonna be
tough to prove.
And we're gonna need the syringe
with Emma's prints to tie her
to Vivian Calas's murder.
Chances are,
Emma dumped it.
I looked at the autopsy photos
of the first three victims.
Strangle me.
I'll try.
I'll hold
the rope.
The first three
original victims were
between five-five
and five-seven.
Matt Spevak was nearly
six feet tall.
Pull.
Look at the angle of the rope.
Upwards from
front to back.
Which is exactly the
way that it should be,
given Matt
Spevak's height
and natural
arm movement.
Oh. Switch
places with me.
Okay. The impression
angles downward.
CRAGEN:
That's what
you would expect
if the perp was shorter
than the victim.
Just like the person
who strangled Claudia,
Donna and Susan.
STABLER:
All angled downward.
Emma Spevak is only
five foot three.
She killed them all.
Your rope trick's not going
to be enough, Doc.
We need a confession from Emma,
or she walks on five murders.
( doorbell ringing )
BENSON:
Emma, we
need to talk.
Can you please come back later?
I'm just not up
to talking right now.
We know you've been
through a lot.
This won't take long.
EMMA:
I've been mourning my brother.
I can't believe that he's dead.
Mom's gone, too.
All I have are these.
BENSON:
That's you with
your brother?
And Mom.
You really loved her.
How long has
she been gone?
Seven years.
What'd she die of?
A stroke.
You said you
needed to talk.
About what?
Matt's death.
To be honest,
we're a little confused,
and you could really
help us out here.
All right.
Now, why don't we start
with your attack?
I think I've told you everything
already.
Tell us again.
Now, who choked you?
My brother.
Why are you torturing me
like this?
Well, see our problem is,
that when EMS found you,
Matt was already dead.
Well, I passed out.
I-I didn't call 911
until I came to.
You-You think I'm
making this up?
Well, what should we think,
Emma?
That Matt tried to kill me.
Matt murdered Vivian Calas.
No, we've ruled him out.
Matt did not murder Vivian.
Who did then?
BENSON:
Oh, we don't know.
That's why we're asking you.
Well, if I think of anything
I'll be sure to call you
right away.
So, Emma killed her mother, too?
She died of a stroke,
just like Vivian Calas.
How much you want to bet
it was caused by an air embolus?
But how are we going
to prove it?
We have to
exhume her body.
I need more
than that.
You got
to check out Emma's house.
The place is like a shrine
to her mother.
So, she loved her--
that's hardly grounds
for an exhumation.
The point I'm making is
that Mommy didn't reciprocate.
Matt got all the attention.
And so now,
she's killing old women
to get back at Mom
for not loving her.
Yeah, but if
Emma knows how
to kill with air,
why is she
changing her M.O.
to strangulation
with a rope?
It was her brother's
climbing rope.
She set him up.
Sibling rivalry.
So Mom really was
Emma's first victim.
HUANG:
Most serial killers
start close to home.
Well, if I can establish
that Emma's mother really
did die
of an air-induced stroke,
then we've got
our probable cause.
STABLER:
Yeah, but Emma's not
gonna fry herself
by letting us dig up her mother.
You know any friendly judges?
What the hell do you want?
I'm so sorry to
bother you at home,
Judge Terhune,
but it's urgent.
Well, I'm in the middle
of something pretty important
myself.
MAN:
Joe, are you
folding this hand?
No! No. C-Come on.
Come on in, all right?
Come on.
I just need Your
Honor's signature.
You hit the jackpot, Dearie.
I'm in.
I believe you all
know ADA Novak.
Judge Ridenour,
Judge Petrovsky,
Judge Wyler,
Judge Bradley.
I've had this
nightmare before,
only I was naked.
Charming.
What could be so important
that it couldn't
wait until morning?
An exhumation order.
You better sign it, Joe.
Corpse might be a flight risk.
NOVAK:
Your Honor,
this body may
be the key
to solving
six murders.
I'm in.
And I take it
the family won't
consent, hmm?
The suspect is
the sole survivor.
We want to exhume
her mother.
Raise.
We think she
killed her, too.
Was the mom's death
ruled a homicide?
No, but we have
new evidence.
JUDGE TERHUNE:
And you want me to disturb
the sanctity of the
dead on your say-so?
I have a very convincing
but long argument.
It'll disturb the sanctity
of your
poker game.
Thank you.
Go. Go. Go, go.
STABLER:
What are the chances
of finding a needle mark
after seven years?
New York State law requires
all cadavers be embalmed.
The skin should still be intact.
Whenever you're ready.
( engine chugging )
What kind of
family engraves the
name of their kids
into their headstone
before they die?
A really close one?
Check that out.
Matthew and Emma--
born May 9, 1971.
They're twins.
HUANG:
Fraternal twins.
I checked the
hospital records.
Emma Spevak was
born two minutes
after her brother Matt.
Man, she's been following
in his footsteps her whole life.
Always trying
to catch up,
but never able to.
HUANG:
That's why she
used the rope.
She hates her brother,
but she's bound to him.
This is all fascinating,
but it doesn't help us
send Emma upstate.
WARNER:
This will.
Margaret Spevak's
mummified neck.
And a small
needle mark
in the carotid artery.
Emma killed her mother
with an air embolus.
Can you prove it?
WARNER:
No.
Emma doesn't know that.
HUANG:
Be careful.
She's spent
her whole life
hating her mother.
If you confront her
with what she's done,
she's never going to talk.
Okay. So, what, empathy?
She's going to need
more than empathy.
She's going to
need an ally.
So, how do we do that?
Reenact the sibling rivalry.
Can I get you
something to drink?
I'm okay.
Why did I have
to come down here?
Uh, we wanted to
apologize to you.
Personally.
Apologize? For what?
For dragging
you into this.
Emma,
we've made a terrible mistake.
What kind of mistake?
We searched Matt's apartment.
And we found his rock-climbing
equipment.
His rope matches
the strangulation mark
on those poor women's necks.
I understand.
You were just doing your job.
We are so sorry.
Am I free to go?
Yeah.
Come here. Come here.
Come here!
What are you doing?
Are you apologizing to her?
What do you care?
What do I care?
I'm in charge.
My case, remember?
Elliot, this
is our case.
Please don't talk
to me like this
in front of her.
We're equals.
( laughs ):
Right.
Did she bring you down here?
Yeah?
You bring her down here,
so you can take the credit?
No, I brought her down
here 'cause I knew
that you wouldn't
apologize.
Well, you're damn right
about that.
We wouldn't even be here
if Emma had the guts
to open her mouth.
What are you talking about?
You knew what was going on.
You knew your brother was up
to his ass
in gambling debts
and using the foundation
to cover himself.
You did nothing about it,
and you went right along
with him.
No!
You're a liar.
Elliot.
You protect your brother,
and he almost kills you.
You're pathetic.
I loved my brother.
Elliot, leave
her alone.
Shut up.
You know what the problem is?
Women shouldn't be cops.
They shouldn't be doctors.
They're too weak and stupid.
I'm sorry about that.
Does he always talk
to you like that?
You heard him.
He's in charge.
I'm sure you know how it is.
( sighs )
Do I ever.
I was always the good girl.
Always the helper.
Emma, do this.
Emma, do that.
I know how you feel.
My mother was a drunk.
And I had to carry her
into her bed every night.
I've had to scoop the vomit
off the floor.
I thought I'd never escape.
But you did.
Yeah, after she died.
It's the only time
that I ever felt free.
( sighs )
Mothers are all the same.
You try to be good to them,
and all they do is treat you
like dirt.
You're a nurse.
You're a caregiver.
I'm sure you were great
to your mother.
She had cancer.
I took care of her
for five years.
Five years?
Where was your brother?
Matt was off in medical school.
And then doing his residency.
Mama used all of her money
to pay for it.
Oh, and I'm sure
he didn't appreciate it.
I'm sure he just took you
for granted.
He made me work for him.
He made me take care
of all those women
that were just like Mama.
Wash my clothes, walk my dog,
clean my fridge.
A girl can only take so much.
They thought that
my brother was a god.
I took care of them.
I did all the work.
You had to do something.
Yes.
With Matt's rope.
Then I was free.
Just like with your mother.
Yes.
How did you do it, Emma?
With a little shot of air.
It always worked so quickly.
What do you mean?
When I was in nursing school,
I'd see daughters
by their mothers' beds, trapped,
watching their lives disappear.
So, you helped them.
I set them free.
How many were there?
Dozens.
Do you remember any
of their names?
They were all called Mama.
Captioning sponsored by
UNIVERSAL NETWORK TELEVISION
and NBC
Captioned by
Media Access Group at WGBH
access.wgbh.org